Draft for generating a certificate and importing one (#2890)
zowe/docs-site: docs/user-guide/generate-certificates.md

> # Generate a certificate if you do not have one

Reviewer: To better follow our style guide: Generating a certificate if ...

If you do not have a certificate, you can generate either of the following certificate types:

* [PKCS12 certificate](#create-a-pkcs12-keystore)
* [JCERACFKS certificate](#create-a-jceracfks-certificate)

Both certificate types are self-signed certificates.

> ## Create a PKCS12 keystore

Reviewer: To better follow our style guide: Creating a PKC...

Follow these steps to generate a PKCS12 keystore:

1. [Configure the PKCS12 setup section in zowe.yaml](#configure-the-pkcs12-setup-section-in-zoweyaml)
2. [Run the command to generate a PKCS12 keystore](#run-the-command-to-generate-a-pkcs12-keystore)

> ### Configure the PKCS12 setup section in zowe.yaml

Reviewer: To better follow our style guide: Configuring the PKC...

 - A certificate name (or alias) `localhost`, specified in `zowe.setup.certificate.pkcs12.name`  
 - A certificate authority name `local_ca`, specified in `zowe.setup.certificate.certificate.pkcs12.caAlias`

```
zowe:
  setup:
    certificate:
      type: PKCS12
      pkcs12:
        directory: /var/zowe/keystore
        lock: true
        name: localhost      # Optional, default value is localhost.
        password: password   # Optional, default value is password.
        caAlias: local_ca    # Optional, default value is local_ca.
        caPassword: local_ca_password  # Optional, default value is local_ca_password.
      dname:                # Distinguished name for Zowe generated certificates. All optional.
        caCommonName: ""
        commonName: ""
        orgUnit: ""
        org: ""
        locality: ""
        state: ""
        country: ""
      validity: 3650
      san:
        - dvipa.my-company.com
        - 12.34.56.78
```

**Tips:** To get the san IP address, you could run `ping dvipa.my-company.com` in your terminal. Please note that `dvipa.my-company.com` is an example address here.

> ### Run the command to generate a PKCS12 keystore

Reviewer: To better follow our style guide: Running the command ...

```
  certificate:
    keystore:
      type: PKCS12
      file: /var/zowe/keystore/localhost/localhost.keystore.p12
      password: password
      alias: localhost
    truststore:
      type: PKCS12
      file: /var/zowe/keystore/localhost/localhost.truststore.p12
      password: password
    pem:
      key: /var/zowe/keystore/localhost/localhost.key
      certificate: /var/zowe/keystore/localhost/localhost.cer
      certificateAuthorities: /var/zowe/keystore/local_ca/local_ca.cer
```

For details about the certificate you generated, run the following command:  
`keytool -v -list keystore localhost.keystore.p12 -storetype PKCS12`

For more information about additional commands to manage a keystore, see the [keytool documentation](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/tools/keytool.html).

### Next steps after PKCS12 setup

When using a Zowe-generated certificate, you will be challenged by your browser when logging in to Zowe to accept Zowe's untrusted certificate authority. Depending on the browser you are using there are different ways to proceed. See next steps about how to [import the PKCS12 certificate to your brower](./import-certificates#import-your-pkcs12-certificate).

> ## Create a JCERACFKS certificate

Reviewer: To better follow our style guide:: Creating a ...

Use the following procedure to configure zowe.yaml:

1. [Configure the JCERACFKS setup section in zowe.yaml](#configure-the-jceracfks-setup-section-in-zoweyaml).
2. [Run the command to generate a JCERACFKS certificate](#run-the-command-to-generate-a-jceracfks-certificate).

To assist with updating `zowe.yaml`, see the example yaml in [Scenario 3: Use a z/OS keyring-based keystore with Zowe generated certificates](#certificate-configuration-scenarios.md/##scenario-3-use-a-zos-keyring-with-zowe-generated-certificates) in the article Certificate configuration scenarios.

> ### Configure the JCERACFKS setup section in zowe.yaml

Reviewer: To better follow our style guide: Configuring the JCER ...

# Generate a certificate if you do not have a certificate

If you do not have a certificate, you can generate either of the following certificate types:
* PKCS12 certificate
* JCERACFKS certificate 

Both certificate types are self-signed certificates.
## Create a self-signed PKCS12 certificate

> Use the following procedure to configure zowe.yaml and create a self-signed PKCS12 certificate:

Reviewer 2: create a PKCS12 keystore:

  setup:
    certificate:
      type: PKCS12
        directory: /var/zowe/keystore
        lock: true
        name: localhost
        password: password
        caAlias: local_ca
        caPassword: local_ca_password
      dname:
        caCommonName: ""
        commonName: ""
        orgUnit: ""
        org: ""
        locality: ""
        state: ""
        country: ""
      validity: 3650
      san:
        - dvipa.my-company.com
        - 12.34.56.78
```

> To assist with updating `zowe.yaml`, the values to generate a self-signed PKCS12 certificate are included in the section beginning with`# >>>> Certificate setup scenario 1`. Other certificate scenarios lower down in the `zowe.yaml` file are commented out.

Reviewer 3: Do we have a link to these scenarios? When we do, we should add these scenario links.

Reviewer 3: Ok. Discussions with API ML devs agree that these scenarios should also be in Zowe docs. I can address this.

Author: > Ok. Discussions with API ML devs agree that these scenarios should also be in Zowe docs. I can address this.

I have added the links to each scenario.

### Run the command to generate a PKCS12 certificate

> The `zwe init certificate` command generates a certificate based on `zowe.yaml` values in the `zowe.setup.certificate` section. These certificate values used at runtime are referenced in the  `zowe.certificates` section in the `zowe.yaml` file. Specify `--update-config` for the `zwe` command. This setting updates the runtime `zowe.certificates` section to reference the generated certificate generated from the `zowe.setup.certificate`.

Reviewer 3: It seems a procedure and example are needed here. 
"Specify `--update-config` for the `zwe` command" is a step. A procedure would seem appropriate.

  setup:
    certificate:
      type: PKCS12

>         directory: /var/zowe/keystore

Reviewer 4: The `directory` through `caPassword` should be nested under `pkcs12` ... see https://docs.zowe.org/stable/appendix/zwe_server_command_reference/zwe/init/zwe-init-certificate

        lock: true
        name: localhost      # Optional, default value is localhost.
        password: password   # Optional, default value is password.
        caAlias: local_ca    # Optional, default value is local_ca.
        caPassword: local_ca_password  # Optional, default value is local_ca_password.
      dname:                # Distinguished name for Zowe generated certificates. All optional.
        caCommonName: ""
        commonName: ""
        orgUnit: ""
        org: ""
        locality: ""
        state: ""
        country: ""
      validity: 3650
      san:
        - dvipa.my-company.com
        - 12.34.56.78
```

> To assist with updating `zowe.yaml`, the values to generate a self-signed PKCS12 certificate are included in the section beginning with`[# >>>> Certificate setup scenario 1](https://github.com/zowe/zowe-install-packaging/blob/60bc4b44ecd502fcec640fbb9e2874e9d56e826a/example-zowe.yaml#L97)`. Other certificate scenarios lower down in the `zowe.yaml` file are commented out.

Reviewer 2: a PKCS12 keystore

### Run the command to generate a PKCS12 certificate

> The `zwe init certificate` command generates a certificate based on `zowe.yaml` values in the `zowe.setup.certificate` section. These certificate values used at runtime are referenced in the  `zowe.certificates` section in the `zowe.yaml` file. Specify `--update-config` for the `zwe` command. This setting updates the runtime `zowe.certificates` section to reference the generated certificate generated from the `zowe.setup.certificate`.

Reviewer 4: Typo in `zowe.certificates` ... it should be `zowe.certificate`

> The following command output shows the generation of a self-signed PKCS12 certificate using the default values, and has the following associated artifacts: 

Reviewer 2: the PKCS12 keystore

**Note:**  
Some detailed output messages have been omitted.

- The CA is created.
- The keystore is created and the CA is added to the keystore.

> - The certificate is createed and is added to the keystore.

Reviewer 2: *created

    truststore:
      type: PKCS12
      file: /var/zowe/keystore/localhost/localhost.truststore.p12
      password: password
    pem:
      key: /var/zowe/keystore/localhost/localhost.key
      certificate: /var/zowe/keystore/localhost/localhost.cer
      certificateAuthorities: /var/zowe/keystore/local_ca/local_ca.cer
```

If you want to double check the certificate you generate, run `keytool -v -list keystore localhost.keystore.p12` in the prompt for details about this certificate. See more commands to manage a keystore [here](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/tools/keytool.html).

### Next step

When using a self-signed certificate, you will be challenged by your browser when logging in to Zowe to accept its untrusted certificate authority. Depending on the browser you are using there are different ways to proceed. See next step about how to import the PKCS12 certificate to your brower [here](./import-certificates#import-your-pkcs12-certificate).

## Create a self-signed JCERACFKS certificate

### Configure the JCERACFKS setup section in zowe.yaml

For JCERACFKS certificate (z/OS keyring) users, here are some instructions about the fileds in the `zowe.yaml` file.

> <!-- - `zowe.setup.certificate.keyring.owner` is the keyring owner. It's optional and default value is `zowe.setup.security.users.zowe`. If it's also not defined, the default value is ZWESVUSR. Sam: didn't see "owner" in the yaml file. -->

Author: @Joe-Winchester Hi Joe, would you please help me confirm if there is a "owner" field in the corresponding section in `zowe.yaml`? Because I didn't see that in the [example yaml file](https://github.com/zowe/zowe-install-packaging/blob/v2.x/staging/example-zowe.yaml). Thank you very much!

Reviewer 5: Hi @samanthasusu ,  good catch !  I have only ever created a keyring woth the owner default to the `zowe.setup.security.users.zowe` value of `ZWESVUSR`.  I didn't know it was possible to do a local override.
As a test I created 
```
zowe
   security:
      users:
        zowe: ZWESVUSR
...
    certificate:
      type: JCERACFKS
      createZosmfTrust: true
      keyring:
        # keyring name
        name: ZoweKeyring
        owner: WINCHJ
```
and ran the `zwe init certificate` to see what happened.  In the `ZWEKRING` JCL that was created it did use the `WINCHJ` value, 
```
//         SET  ZOWEUSER=WINCHJ
...
/* Create the keyring .............................................. */
   RACDCERT ADDRING(&ZOWERING.) ID(&ZOWEUSER.)
   SETROPTS RACLIST(DIGTRING) REFRESH
```
which confirms that the value is used in `zowe.setup.certificate.keyring.owner` if one is specified, so the doc is correct.
Thank you for pointing this out !!!

Author: Thank you @Joe-Winchester  for your explanation. That makes sense to me.

```
  certificate:
    keystore:
      type: PKCS12
      file: /var/zowe/keystore/localhost/localhost.keystore.p12
      password: password
      alias: localhost
    truststore:
      type: PKCS12
      file: /var/zowe/keystore/localhost/localhost.truststore.p12
      password: password
    pem:
      key: /var/zowe/keystore/localhost/localhost.key
      certificate: /var/zowe/keystore/localhost/localhost.cer
      certificateAuthorities: /var/zowe/keystore/local_ca/local_ca.cer
```

For details about the certificate you generated, run the following command:  
 `keytool -v -list keystore localhost.keystore.p12`  
For more information about additional commands to manage a keystore, see the [keytool documentation](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/tools/keytool.html).

### Next steps after PKCS12 setup

When using a self-signed certificate, you will be challenged by your browser when logging in to Zowe to accept Zowe's untrusted certificate authority. Depending on the browser you are using there are different ways to proceed. See next steps about how to [import the PKCS12 certificate to your brower](./import-certificates#import-your-pkcs12-certificate).

> ## Create a self-signed JCERACFKS certificate

Reviewer 3: Validate that JCERACFKS certificates are self-signing.

Reviewer 3: This has been validated. JCERACFKS are also self-signed.

#>
```

Values of the `zowe.certificates` section are updated with customization of `--update-config` to reference the newly generated certificate. These updates are logged by the `zwe init certificate` command output.

Open the `zowe.yaml` file to check the references to the newly generated certificate values, as shown in the following code snippet:

**Example YAML:**

```
  certificate:
    keystore:
      type: PKCS12
      file: /var/zowe/keystore/localhost/localhost.keystore.p12
      password: password
      alias: localhost
    truststore:
      type: PKCS12
      file: /var/zowe/keystore/localhost/localhost.truststore.p12
      password: password
    pem:
      key: /var/zowe/keystore/localhost/localhost.key
      certificate: /var/zowe/keystore/localhost/localhost.cer
      certificateAuthorities: /var/zowe/keystore/local_ca/local_ca.cer
```

For details about the certificate you generated, run the following command:  

>  `keytool -v -list keystore localhost.keystore.p12`  

Reviewer 2: `keytool -v -list keystore localhost.keystore.p12 -storetype PKCS12`

For more information about additional commands to manage a keystore, see the [keytool documentation](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/tools/keytool.html).

### Next steps after PKCS12 setup

> When using a self-signed certificate, you will be challenged by your browser when logging in to Zowe to accept Zowe's untrusted certificate authority. Depending on the browser you are using there are different ways to proceed. See next steps about how to [import the PKCS12 certificate to your brower](./import-certificates#import-your-pkcs12-certificate).

Reviewer 2: When using a Zowe-generated certificate, you will ...

## Create a self-signed JCERACFKS certificate

> Use the following procedure to configure zowe.yaml and create a self-signed PKCS12:

Reviewer 2: Use the following procedure to configure zowe.yaml ~~and create a self-signed PKCS12~~:

 - A certificate authority with the label `localca` specified in  `zowe.setup.certificate.keyring.caLabel` with a common name `Zowe Service CA`

**Example:**
```
zowe:
  setup:
    certificate:
      type: JCERACFKS
      createZosmfTrust: true
      keyring:
        name: ZoweKeyring   
        label: localhost   # Optional, default value is localhost.
        caLabel: localca   # Optional, default value is localca.
      dname:   # Distinguished name for Zowe generated certificates. All optional.
        caCommonName: ""
        commonName: ""
        orgUnit: ""
        org: ""
        locality: ""
        state: ""
        country: ""
      validity: 3650
      san:
        - dvipa.my-company.com
        - 12.34.56.78
```

**Notes:** 

- Alias names should be all lower cases.
- The name and lables shown above are the default value in `zowe.yaml`.
- `dname` for distinguished name is all optional.
- Domain names and IPs should be added into certificate SAN. If the field `san` is not defined, the `zwe init` command will use `zowe.externalDomains`. The value for the `san` parameter presented in the example is for demonstration purposes.

> To assist with updating `zowe.yaml`, the values to generate a self-signed PKCS12 certificate are included in the section beginning with`[# >>>> Certificate setup scenario 3](https://github.com/zowe/zowe-install-packaging/blob/60bc4b44ecd502fcec640fbb9e2874e9d56e826a/example-zowe.yaml#L175)`. Other certificate scenarios in the `zowe.yaml` file are commented out.

Reviewer 2: to generate ~~a self-signed PKCS12~~ certificate

### Run the command to generate a JCERACFKS certificate

> The following command output shows the generation of a self-signed JCERACFKS certificate using the default values. Some detailed output messages have been omitted.

Reviewer 2: of a ~~self-signed~~ JCERACFKS certificate

      certificateAuthorities: /var/zowe/keystore/local_ca/local_ca.cer
```

For details about the certificate you generated, run the following command:  
`keytool -v -list keystore localhost.keystore.p12 -storetype PKCS12`
For more information about additional commands to manage a keystore, see the [keytool documentation](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/tools/keytool.html).

### Next steps after PKCS12 setup

When using a Zowe-generated certificate, you will be challenged by your browser when logging in to Zowe to accept Zowe's untrusted certificate authority. Depending on the browser you are using there are different ways to proceed. See next steps about how to [import the PKCS12 certificate to your brower](./import-certificates#import-your-pkcs12-certificate).

## Create a self-signed JCERACFKS certificate

Use the following procedure to configure zowe.yaml:

1. [Configure the JCERACFKS setup section in zowe.yaml](#configure-the-jceracfks-setup-section-in-zoweyaml)
2. [Run the command to generate a JCERACFKS certificate](#run-the-command-to-generate-a-jceracfks-certificate)

### Configure the JCERACFKS setup section in zowe.yaml

> For JCERACFKS certificate (z/OS keyring) users, customize the following parameters in the `zowe.yaml` file:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
For JCERACFKS certificate (z/OS key ring) users, customize the following parameters in the `zowe.yaml` file:
```

> - `zowe.setup.certificate.keyring.owner` is the keyring owner. It's optional and default value is `zowe.setup.security.users.zowe`. If it's also not defined, the default value is ZWESVUSR.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- `zowe.setup.certificate.keyring.owner` is the key ring owner. It's optional and default value is `zowe.setup.security.users.zowe`. If it's also not defined, the default value is ZWESVUSR.
```

- `zowe.setup.certificate.keyring.name`  

>  Specifies the keyring name to be created on z/OS. This is required if `zowe.setup.certificate.type` is `JCERACFKS`.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
 Specifies the key ring name to be created on z/OS. This is required if `zowe.setup.certificate.type` is `JCERACFKS`.
```
